{simulist} full package review (#33)
epiverse-trace/simulist: README.Rmd

)
```

# _simulist_: Simulate line list data <img src="man/figures/logo.svg" align="right" width="120" />

<!-- badges: start -->
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/license/mit/)
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/{{ gh_repo }}/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/{{ gh_repo }}/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
[![Codecov test coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/{{ gh_repo }}/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://app.codecov.io/gh/{{ gh_repo }}?branch=main)
[![Lifecycle: experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#experimental)
<!-- badges: end -->

> `{simulist}` is an R package to simulate infectious disease outbreak data, including line lists and contacts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`{simulist}` is an R package to simulate individual-level infectious disease outbreak data, including line lists and contact tracing data. It can often be useful to have synthetic datasets like these available when demonstrating outbreak analytics techniques or testing new analysis methods.
```

Reviewer: Included some motivation

Author: Added in 6961c68c87bde43edc0a9f160647fc061a6da27e.

> `{simulist}` is an R package to simulate infectious disease outbreak data, including line lists and contacts.

Author: I have included the extra contextual information added by Adam above, it is similar to what is written in the project idea.

`{simulist}` is developed at the [Centre for the Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases](https://www.lshtm.ac.uk/research/centres/centre-mathematical-modelling-infectious-diseases) at the [London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine](https://www.lshtm.ac.uk/) as part of [Epiverse-TRACE](https://data.org/initiatives/epiverse/).

## Installation

You can install the development version of `{simulist}` from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# check whether {pak} is installed
if(!require("pak")) install.packages("pak")
pak::pak("epiverse-trace/simulist")
```

## Quick start

```{r load-simulist}
library(simulist)
library(epiparameter)
```

> The line list simulation requires a serial interval, onset-to-hospitalisation delay, and onset-to-death delay. We can load these load these from the library of epidemiological parameters in the `{epiparameter}` R package, or if these are not available, such as the serial interval for COVID-19 we can create them ourselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The line list simulation requires that we define a serial interval, onset-to-hospitalisation delay, and onset-to-death delay. We can load these from the library of epidemiological parameters in the `{epiparameter}` R package if available, or if these are not in the database yet (such as the serial interval for COVID-19) we can define them ourselves.
```

Author: Updated in 6961c68c87bde43edc0a9f160647fc061a6da27e.

```{r create-epidists}
# create COVID-19 serial interval
serial_interval <- epiparameter::epidist(
  disease = "COVID-19",
  epi_dist = "serial interval",
  prob_distribution = "gamma",
  prob_distribution_params = c(shape = 1, scale = 1)
)

# get onset to hospital admission from {epiparameter} database
onset_to_hosp <- epiparameter::epidist_db(
  disease = "COVID-19",

>   epi_dist = "onset to hospitalisation",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  epi_dist = "onset_to_hospitalisation",
```

Author: The new default style of specifying distribution names to {epiparameter} is use whitespace separation. The use of underscores or dashes will be recognised as well, but for documentation purposes I will stick with whitespace.

  single_epidist = TRUE
)

# get onset to death from {epiparameter} database
onset_to_death <- epiparameter::epidist_db(
  disease = "COVID-19",

>   epi_dist = "onset to death",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  epi_dist = "onset_to_death",
```

Author: Leaving unchanged, see above for explanation.

  single_epidist = TRUE
)
```

> To simulate a line list for COVID-19 with an assumed reproduction number (`R`) of 1.1 we use the `sim_linelist()` function.

Reviewer: Suggest give some more details about default settings (as R>1 would in theory continue for long time with thousands/millions of cases)

Author: Added in 6961c68c87bde43edc0a9f160647fc061a6da27e.

```{r sim-linelist}

> linelist <- sim_linelist(

Reviewer: I initially got this error:
```
Error in rep(times, next_gen) + serial(sum(n_offspring)) : 
  non-numeric argument to binary operator
```
Then realised it was issue with `bpmodels` dependency. Should we make this clearer to user (i.e. that the function is calling a simulation model from elsewhere)? And presumably will want to switch to `epichains` now `bpmodels` is deprecated?

  R = 1.1,
  serial_interval = serial_interval,
  onset_to_hosp = onset_to_hosp,
  onset_to_death = onset_to_death
)
head(linelist)
```

> In this example, the line list is simulated using the default values (see `?sim_linelist`). The default hospitalisation rate is 0.2 (or 20% of individual infected become hospitalised) and the start date of the outbreak is 1st January 2023. To modify either of these to make them more realistic we can specify them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the line list is simulated using the default values (see `?sim_linelist`). The default hospitalisation risk is assumed to be 0.2 (i.e. there is a 20% probability an infected individual becomes hospitalised) and the start date of the outbreak is 1st January 2023. To modify either of these, we can specify them in the function.
```

Reviewer: Is edit correct, i.e. the 20% risk is a probability not a multiplier?

Author: Yes, it is a risk, the risk of being hospitalised is determined by using `sample()` with the probability given by the user. I've updated in 6961c68c87bde43edc0a9f160647fc061a6da27e.

```{r sim-linelist-diff-args}
linelist <- sim_linelist(
  R = 1.1,
  serial_interval = serial_interval,
  onset_to_hosp = onset_to_hosp,
  onset_to_death = onset_to_death,
  hosp_rate = 0.01,
  outbreak_start_date = as.Date("2019-12-01")
)
head(linelist)
```

> To simulate a table of contacts we can reuse the serial interval from the example above, and we additionally need a contact distribution. This distribution represents the variability in number of contacts that each person in the population has.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To simulate a table of contacts of cases (i.e. to a reflect contact tracing dataset) we can reuse the serial interval from the example above. We additionally need a contact distribution, which represents the probability that each person in the population will be a given number of contacts on a given day.
```

Reviewer: Edited definition – correct?

Author: I've updated the definition in 6961c68c87bde43edc0a9f160647fc061a6da27e and 907457c55da9029edfea71188df6c774fa3d528e. I think we need to think a bit more about the definition and implementation of this before the release, or at least for the next release. Discussion is taking place in issue #35.

> To simulate a table of contacts we can reuse the serial interval from the example above, and we additionally need a contact distribution. This distribution represents the variability in number of contacts that each person in the population has.

Author: Updated in 6961c68c87bde43edc0a9f160647fc061a6da27e.

```{r, sim-contacts}
contact_distribution <- epiparameter::epidist(
  disease = "COVID-19",
  epi_dist = "contact_distribution",
  prob_distribution = "pois",
  prob_distribution_params = c(l = 5)
)

contacts <- sim_contacts(
  R = 1.1,
  serial_interval = serial_interval,
  contact_distribution = contact_distribution
)
head(contacts)
```

> If both the line list and contacts table are required, they can be jointly simulated using the `sim_outbreak()` function. This uses the same inputs as `sim_linelist()` and `sim_contacts()` to produce a line list and contacts table of the same outbreak (the arguments also have the same default settings as the other functions).

Author: > Maybe also worth adding when/why a user might want to simulate only contacts or contacts as part of the same outbreak with sim_outbreak?

Thanks for the comment, I like the idea, but I'm unable to think of a use case/case study that would fit, other than something trivial, e.g. teaching, etc. Could you provide an example of when a user might want each type of dataset?
